# Diversity reduction due to linked deleterious mutation

This is ``bgshr``, a package for computing the expected reduction in diversity 
due to linked deleterious mutations.

### Installation

Dependencies are listed in [requirements.txt](requirements.txt). `bgshr` can be 
installed directly from github using `pip`. In this sample we create a Python virtual 
environment and install the package:

```
python -m venv ~/path/to/venv
source ~/path/to/venv/bin/activate
pip install git+https://github.com/apragsdale/bgshr.git
```

Alternatively, we can clone and build the package locally:

```
git clone https://github.com/apragsdale/bgshr.git
```

Then we `cd` into the cloned directory and perform a local installation.

```
cd bgshr
pip install .
```

### Dependencies

If `bgshr` was cloned locally, we can install dependencies listed in 
[requirements.txt](requirements.txt) using:

```
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

Minimal dependencies are the ubiquitous `numpy`, `scipy` and `pandas`. It is
highly useful to also have `ipython` installed. Further, `jupyter` is necessary to run
the example notebooks in [examples/](examples/).


### Usage

To calculate diversity reduction (B values) at a site, we use a lookup table of two-locus
predictions for relative reduction in diversity, and combine the effects
of many loci multiplicatively. A first-order correction for interference
can be applied by adjusting parameters based on the local rescaling of
effective population sizes. We generate lookup tables using the `moments++`
model available here: https://github.com/gvbarroso/momentspp/tree/main.

In addition to the lookup table, we need one or more arrays of constrained
genomic elements that experience selected mutations, an array indicating 
estimates of the per-base deleterious mutation rate, and a recombination map or 
per-base recombination rate. Along with these data we require parameters for
the relevant gamma-distributed DFEs, which may include a point mass of neutral
mutations.

Example usage is shown in [human-chr22-example.ipynb](examples/human-chr22-example.ipynb).

Current features include:
- Discretized gamma DFEs
- Handling of mutation maps
- Allows multiple element types (with their own DFEs)
- Likelihood function for inferring drift-effective Ne

### Command-line interface

#### Predicting B-values with a known demographic model

You can predict B-values and diversity from the command line using 
`bgshr predict_B`.
This tool takes model predictions stored in a lookup table and several pieces
of genomic data described below, and produces a table of predictions averaged
in regular genomic intervals (saved as `.csv`).
By default, fields saved to output are:

- `chrom`: Chromosome number (obtained from the mask file).
- `chromStart`, `chromEnd`: Starts and ends of windows.
- `num_sites`: Number of accessible sites, as specified by a genetic mask.
- `exp_pi`: Expected diversity at accessible sites, averaged in windows.
- `B`: Predicted diversity reduction due to BGS at the centers of windows (but see `--resolution` for a complication).

Additional fields can be added by giving the flag `--rich`:

- `exp_del_pi`: Expected diversity at constrained sites (equals `0` in windows with no constrained sites).
- `avg_mut`: Average mutation rate.
- `del_mut`: Average mutation rate at constrained sites.
- `avg_rec`: Average recombination rate across the interval of the window.

Required arguments for this command are:

`-t, --lookup_tbl`: A lookup table generated by `moments++`, holding
two-locus model predictions, saved as a `.csv` file (may be gzipped). 
See the documentation at
https://github.com/gvbarroso/momentspp/tree/main for more details.

`-b, --bed`: One or more BED files recording intervals where sites
are selectively constrained. If more than one file is given, DFE parameters
for each set of intervals should be given in the same order. If a site is present
in more than one BED file, order determines priority and the site is assigned
to the first constraint class where it occurs.

`--shapes`: Shape parameters of the DFE(s), given in the same order as BED files.
All DFEs are gamma or gamma-neutral distributions; gamma-neutral distributions
place a fraction of probability mass (`p_neu`) at selective neutrality.

`--scales`: Scale parameters of the DFE(s), in physical units (`s`).

`--out`: Path to output `.csv` file. The output file is a table in the 
BEDGRAPH format, with predicted B, expected diversity averaged across windows,
and average recombination and mutation rates.

Additional optional arguments:

`--help`: Prints descriptions of each argument.

`--p_neus`: Neutral fraction parameters for each DFE. To use a mix of gamma
and gamma-neutral DFEs, specify `0` for the pure gamma distributions, e.g.,
`--p_neus 0.3 0 0` determines that the DFE of the first class of elements is
gamma-neutral, while the second and third are pure gamma distributions.

`--rmap`: Path to a recombination map file. This is expected to be tab-
separated text file (`.tsv`, `.txt`) with columns specifying the 
recombination rate on irregular genomic intervals. The file may be gzipped.

`--rmap_pos_col`: Specifies the column in `--rmap` from which positions that
define the starts and ends of genomic intervals are loaded. By default, this
is `Position(bp)`.

`--rmap_rate_col`: The column in `--rmap` from which recombination rates
should be loaded (by default, `Rate(cM/Mb)`). It is expected that rates are
given in centiMorgans/Mb.

`-r`, `--rec_rate`: Optional uniform recombination rate, which can be used in
place of an estimated map. If used, you must also give the length of the
chromosome to be modeled with `-L`.

`-L`, `--L`: The length of the chromosome; required if a uniform recombination
(`-r`) or mutation (`-u`) map is to be used.

`--umap`": Path to a file specifying the mutation map. This can be a binary
.npy file holding rates at each base pair (in which missing data should be
`nan`, or a comma or tab-separated text file (`.csv`, `.tsv`), which may be
gzipped. A mutation map text file should have this format;

```
chrom	start	end	rate
22	0	1000	nan
```

where the starts and ends of intervals must be given in the (1-indexed) second
and third columns (the names of the columns do not matter).

`--umap_rate_col`: Specifies the column from which mutation rates should be
loaded in `--umap` is a text file (defaults to `rate`).

`-u`, `--mut_rate`: Optional uniform mutation rate.

`-c`, `--n_corrs`: Number of interference corrections to run.

`--save_corrs`: If given, the B landscape at each interference correction is
retained and saved in the output file, with column names `B_0`, `B_1`, ..., `B`.

`--spacing`: Distance between focal sites (sites where `B` is computed), in
base pairs (default `1000`).

`--window_size`: Window size to use for aggregating constrained elements 
together (default `1000`).

`--resolution`: Window size of output table. By default, this will equal
`--spacing`, but a larger or smaller value may be used if desired.
If `--resolution` does not equal `--spacing`, cubic interpolation is used to
calculate `B` at the center of each window in the output table.

`--n_cores`: Number of cores across which to parallelize computation 
(with the default value 1, `bgshr` loops across blocks of focal sites).

`--chunk_size`: Number of focal sites for which computations should be
performed at once on each processor core (default `100`). Specifying many
cores and a large chunk size will result in a large memory footprint.

`--B_unlinked`: Optional unlinked diversity reduction due to deleterious
mutations on other chromosomes.

`--cbgs_start`: Optional minimum selection coefficient for classic BGS (CBGS) 
predictions. Note that we define the fitness of the heterozygote as `1+s`, so
`s<0`. Defaults to the smallest selection coefficient in the input lookup
table, following any scaling.

`--n_s_cbgs`: Number of selection coefficients to append to the lookup table
with CBGS (default `20`).

`-v`, `--verbose`: If given, prints updates throughout prediction.

`--rich`: If given, emits extra information in the output table.

`--Ne`: Effective population size to use for prediction.
The parameters of the input lookup table are scaled to match this parameter.
If we use a lookup table computed for an equilibrium population, the scaling
is exact to numerical error. 
For non-equilibrium tables, scaling is carried out with respect to the 
ancestral population size.
In this case, a twofold scaling (`--Ne` is twice the ancestral size of the 
lookup table demography) can be interpreted as a doubling of all time and
effective size parameters in the model.

`--mask`: BED mask file to use for filtering sites recorded in the output 
table. If no mask is given, the coverage of the provided mutation map is used
to filter sites represented in the output table.
Hence, if a uniform mutation map is used and no mask is provided, all sites
from `1` to `L` will be represented in output.

#### Fitting the drift-effective population size 

If we wish to fit the effective population size parameter for an equilibrium
population, we can do so with `bgshr fit_Ne`, which optimizes the parameter
by maximizing the likelihood of an empirical diversity dataset given `Ne`.
Note that because prediction must be carried out several times to fit `Ne`,
this procedure is computationally expensive and may take a long time.
This tool takes all the arguments that `bgshr predict_B` does, with the
exception that

`--fit_Ne`: Specifies the initial guess for optimization. Unlike with the
prediction script, this argument is required for fitting.

Additional required arguments are:

`--ndns`: Path to a `.npy` binary file with base-pair-level counts of
same-by-state and different-by-state allele copies (`nd` and `ns`) in its
zeroth and first columns.

`--max_iter`: Maximum number of function calls during fitting.
To achieve convergence, values near `30` are desirable.

`--log_out`: Path for the output log file. This file records the fitted value,
log-likelihood, and warning flag output by the `scipy` function used for
optimization. 
It also retains the runtime, `Ne` parameter and likelihood at each function
call.

The `fit_Ne` tool outputs a table of predictions with the same data columns
as does `predict_B` (note that the `--rich` argument is not presently 
implemented for the fitting script: the additional fields are always saved).
